EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.	How was the funding of ₦54.27m arrived at - Is it the amount being offered by USADF or arrived at by the consultant?

2.	If arrived by the consultant, did it have the input of the project promoters?

3.	A bank loan should not even be considered for the project. The report emphasises that there is low level of support for ASD and other developmental challenges in Nigeria. That means projects like this can’t be sustainable on its own without some form of grant/subsidy

Please remove sewing machines from the list of items for which the funds requested will be used (as they have already been bought) and replace equipment for occupational therapy with assessment tools for therapy.  

CHAPTER 2  

1.	The overview on PSLF is very weak and any new Grantor (aside USADF) reading the report would not support the project. 

2.	It should be assumed that the audience for the report should be wider than USADF. That means any funder needs to know details of the track record 

3.	There should be more details on the following

a.	PSLC activities – impacts, students, collaborations, support to other centres etc. 
b.	Training Academy
c.	As a matter of fact, PSLC is only mentioned about once in Section 3.11 in the entire report

4.	What is the basis of inserting the Balance Sheet in this Chapter. Grantors are more interested in impacts, outreach and the likes and not necessarily financials. However, if there is a need for financials then:
 
a.	Why is the P/L also not included with the Balance Sheet
b.	Are these financials audited or management report – this should be stated

5.	Instead of a table on management of PSLF, why can’t we have the Organogram and then a further discussion on the operations of the different department and services offered. Is the existing Organogram ideal, can it be sufficient for the expansion

6.	The management of PSLF is similar to that of PSLC, is that correct. 

7.	There needs to be a proper description about how the PSLF encompasses PSLC and other activities. This is not clear from the report

PSLC was not mentioned in chapter 2 but rather in chapter 3.
The location of The Gazelle Studio (page 13) was omitted. This should be stated.




CHAPTER 3 

1.	The report has only ticked the boxes on the project implementation. It is very weak on the details of the First Grant Phase (EDI). Any well informed Grantor would be particularly interested in knowing the following amongst others:

1.	How many IDPs were trained
2.	How have they fared after the training
3.	How did PSLF overcome the issues of non interest by IDP parents
4.	Specific impacts of the project – i.e Gender empowerment, increase in income for trained IDPs 

2.	Issues from Section 3.11 – Key Lessons learned/Underscored

1.	Were salaries not paid on time or why is this an issue
2.	The reference to activities of PSLC is not clear. The report doesn’t even talk about PSLC activities 
3.	Why did CDC Tea Breakers services fizzle out. Were the services not sustainable. This is very important as PSLF is also offering services to adults ILWAs

GENERAL COMMENTS ON CHAPTER 6 - 10 

1.	These 5 chapters are all over the place and a big struggle to read. They seem like cut and paste and don’t make for fluid reading

2.	A lot of work needs to be done on these chapters

CHAPTER 6 

1.	The heading – “Technology Options Available” is not clear. The chapter has absolutely nothing to do with technology

2.	The entire chapter needs to be re-written and talk specifically about the entire Expansion Projects

3.	Section 6.1 is very weak and theoretical. Rather the Section should talk specifically about PSLF’s farm project to include the following;	

a.	The location of the proposed farmland 
b.	Size of the land and suitability for cassava cultivation
c.	State of the land and development required
d.	The justification for cassava cultivation. Why not cultivate other crops such as vegetables, maize, if not then what is the attraction with cassava
e.	How will the cassava be cultivated, harvested, stored and sold – it is not enough to state that Nigeria is the biggest grower of cassava in the world and so selling is not an issue.
4.	The chapter should also give an overview of the different phases of the project as follows;

a.	6.2 – Expansion of Sewing/Rental Business
b.	6.3 – Expansion of Outreach Activities
c.	6.4 – Studio Rentals/Store

5.	The different sections should follow the pattern of Section 6.1 and give sound justification for why PSLF is embarking on each of the projects. Overall the report should discuss in detail 
a.	the developmental impacts of each of the projects 
b.	how they fit individually/collectively into the long-term strategy of PSLF

6.	The Chapter should also talk about the following;

a.	Is there a need for additional staffing
b.	What will the new organogram be like 
c.	Is there a need to relocate to bigger operational premises especially for Gazelle etc

CHAPTER 7  

1.	A lot of the figures inserted into this chapter should be removed and put in the Annex Section. The key financials are already discussed in Chapters 9 and 10.

2.	What is required here is a high-level snapshot (summary) of the following;
a.	Total project cost
b.	Production units and Revenues

3.	The chapter should show a table that breakdowns the total project cost as follows;
a.	Cassava Cultivation 		– NXYZ
b.	Sewing/Rental	         		- NXYZ
c.	Outreach Activities 		 - NXYZ
d.	Studio Rentals			- NXYZ
e.	Total Funding Requirements – NXYZ

4.	The above will show a snapshot of the breakdown of how the N54.27m was arrived at.

5.	Has the project cost been discussed and agreed with the project promoter. Or they are just assumptions made by the consultant.

6.	What exactly is the “Developing Capacity for Assisted Living” about
a.	This has not been introduced in detail anywhere in the report
b.	Is this part of the cassava cultivation project – as it seems there is a building of a farm house
c.	If not on the farm then where will it be located. Has PSLF identified/bought land/building already. 
d.	There needs to be a good introduction and justification of this project in Chapter 6 – when discussing the overview of all the different phases of the expansion
e.	Why is this project needed now, when PSLF has not even started the cassava cultivation. 
f.	Is it for Adults LWA or what – explanation and justification is required

7.	All the other granular details of the financials/budget in this Chapter should be moved to Annex Section

CHAPTER 8 

1.	There is no basis for this chapter as no bank will support this project with a commercial loan for the following reasons;
a.	The report has already highlighted the lack of support for this sector by all tiers of Government
b.	There is no evidence in the report that other players in this sector have been able to operate without any form of subsidy/grant or support
c.	As a consequence, it is very doubtful if the services to be provided by PSLF under the expansion will be sustainable, at least in the initial years without any form of subsidy/grant/support
d.	PSLC doesn’t even have a track record in farming to generate commercial loans
e.	The report has also talked about lack of Collateral/Security by PSLF to support a commercial loan

2.	A bank loan should not be even considered for the project. The report emphasises that there is low level of support for ASD and other developmental challenges in Nigeria. That means projects like this can’t be sustainable on its own without some form of grant/subsidy

3.	The target audience for the report should be USADF or other well informed Grantors

CHAPTER 9 

1.	The Assumptions in this Chapter must align with the different phases of the project as properly articulated in Chapter 6.

2.	For instance, Section 9.1 a & b – talks about “Revenue from PSLC for Individuals living with ILWA/Revenue from Training of Therapists”. These two revenue streams are not part of the project and have never been mentioned as such, so where is this coming from. If it is part of the expansion project, then the justification must be discussed in Chapter 6. 

3.	The assumptions should be articulated numerically and not in difficult to read prose format. 

a.	i.e. under Cassava cultivation we can have Assumption 1, 2, 3,4…

4.	Depreciation of Fixed Assets and other financial details should be taken to the Annex Section
5.	There is no basis for the Annual Loan Balance as this project realistically can’t be sustainably executed with commercial loan at 24% interest per annum

CHAPTER 10 

1.	To avoid repetition, Chapter 9 should be merged with Chapter 10, since both chapters talk about financials

2.	What is required here are just the summaries of the financials and not the detailed breakdown of the Cash flow or Balance Sheet. 

3.	The granular details should be moved to Annex Section

CHAPTER 11 

1.	The risks of the different aspects of the project are not properly assessed. The risks of each phase such as Cassava Cultivation, Rentals, Outreach Services need to be addressed separately

2.	The mitigants for each of the risks identified for each of the different phases should also be properly discussed. i.e. 

a.	Section 11.1 – Risks & Mitigants for Expansion of Sewing/rental Business
b.	Section 11.2 – Risks & Mitigants for Expansion of Outreach Services
c.	Section 11.3 – Risks & Mitigants for Studio Rentals/Store

3.	For instance, just stating that “tools and equipment would remain relevant’ is very lame

4.	One of the main challenges of the First Grant Phase (EDI) was poor marketing by Gazelle Studio, as such there must be a proper marketing strategy/Pan for the expansion. 

5.	For example, what is the justification for a vehicle. This is not a distribution business. Deliveries can be made by Taxi/Uber and funds for vehicle utilised more efficiently. 

6.	A proper marketing strategy/Plan should address the following issues amongst others

a.	Who are the target market for Gazelle Studio products
b.	How will these customers be targeted – i.e. social media (cheap avenue)
c.	Is there a need to expand the products line – is quality good
d.	Will incentives such as commissions for marketing staffs be ideal. 


7.2 Budget of Requirements for Business Expansion

A.	Items listed here are not needed. They should be replaced with:
i.	Cost/expansion of land
ii.	Office furniture & fittings

B.	Infrastructure for rental service: The following estimates are to be revised:
S/No.	Description	Budget
Estimate	Revised estimate
i.	3.3KVA Generator	100,000	300,000
ii.	Marketing Car	1,750,000	3,000,000
iii.	5 Ton pickup truck	3,000,000	5,000,000

C.	Developing Capacity for Assisted Living: The following estimate is to be revised:
S/No.	Description	Budget
Estimate	Revised estimate
i.	18 Seater Bus	2,000,000	5,000,000

The solar energy is to be removed while the tools for occupational therapy are to be replaced with assessment tools for therapy.

E.	Dissemination of Information: This will be done only through radio and social media while the disability concert will still take place. Adverts in tabloid should be removed. 

F.	Staff Salaries: The salaries for all categories should be for a minimum of 24 months     and the estimates are to be revised as follows:
S/No.	Description	Budget
Estimate	Revised estimate
i.	Project Coordinator	120,000	150,000
ii.	Project Accountant	120,000	150,000
iii.	Agronomist	80,000	100,000
iv.	Communication teacher for IDPS	30,000	50,000
V.	Drivers	40,000	50,000
vi.	Office Assistant	0	30,000

G.	Fuel & Lubrication: The following estimate is to be revised:
S/No.	Description	Budget
Estimate	Revised estimate
i.	Fuel for Generator 80 ltr/month	87,000	139,200



